# In Search of Socialized Medicine 	
Policymakers have always been suckers for the new new thing. Faced with the burden of rising debt and aging populations in a complex world, they reach for an arsenal of silver bullets. “Innovation,” The Economist once declared, “is the new theology that unites the left and the right of politics.”
 
And so it is with health care: if there is an inviolable premise to the myriad new demonstrations and pilot programs being tested in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), it is that we can innovate our way to a better system. Section 3021 establishes the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation (CMMI) to allow hospitals systems and provider groups to test promising care and payment models. Section 6301 establishes Patient-Centered Outcome Research Institute to coordinate comparative-effectiveness research priorities and disseminate findings. There are initiatives for integrated care around a hospitalization (section 2704), payment bundling (section 3023), and community-based wellness programs (section 4202), each one with the potential to unpack the secrets of our monolithic health care system. 
  
To be sure, it's a daunting task. In 1999, the Institute of Medicine’s landmark report, To Err is Human, found that preventable errors in hospital care were responsible for up to 98,000 deaths every year in the United States. More than a decade later, we are doing no better – the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality’s National Healthcare Quality Report found that, nationwide, hospitals are improving by less than three percent per year across 179 quality indicators. Words like “fragmented,” “siloed,” and “uncoordinated” pepper conversations on the deficiencies in health care because it is understood that there is a real gap between finding the best solutions and translating them into care improvements.
 
But the best solutions are out there. Private and public health systems -- Geisinger, Kaiser Permanente, Mayo Clinic, and the single-payer VA system -- have received high marks from policy experts and industry insiders for their efforts to achieve greater patient outcomes while still holding down costs.  And with the passage of PPACA, never before has there been such a large effort in national policy to converge around the best ideas and propel them forward. Last month, HHS launched the Partnership with Patients, an unprecedented collaborative between government and the private sector to encourage quality innovation in medicine. A few weeks later, Medicare announced a bonus payment strategy to reward hospitals for providing quality care. The efforts are guided by what President Obama described, in a June 2009 speech to the American Medical Association, as “a simple principle: fix what’s broken and build on what works.” 
 
Policy, it appears, is nudging us towards a new era of quality care; our health care system is finally learning how to learn. 

But there is a bitter paradox in the policy efforts to improve quality: they aim to confront national problems which manifest themselves in highly local and personal ways. And the more we rely on policy to lead us towards a better system, the more we deny the most valuable asset in achieving that goal: the very human we innovate in health care.


## “Everybody has to be on the bandwagon”
The story of one of the most famous quality measures -- percentage of patients with acute myocardial infarction who receive a prescription for beta-blockers within seven days of hospital discharge -- is an example of how people fit together. Beta-blockers are a class of drugs that block the effects of adrenaline and slow down the heart rate. In 1982, results from a randomized controlled trial found that administering beta-blockers after heart attacks cut patients’ death rate by an astounding 40 percent. The results were so conclusive for all types of patients that within two years, they had been written into medical textbooks and featured in both medical journals and mainstream news media. By the end of the decade, the medical profession at large had come to understand the importance of a veritable “silver bullet” for heart attack care.  
 
And yet, by the mid-1990s, only 34 percent of patients received beta-blockers after heart attacks. The policy response was an expansive campaign by some of the largest institutions in medicine. The American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association incorporated beta-blocker treatment in guidelines for heart attack care. Buoyed by the IOM report, The Institute for Healthcare Improvement launched the 10,000 Lives Campaign and its successor, 5 Million Lives, both of which stressed beta-blocker treatment after heart attacks as priorities. Beta-blockers become an indicator for HMOs in national quality report cards, and hospital accreditation was tied to its public reporting. The campaigns stressed the importance of system care coordinators, carefully scheduled reminders, and team-based interventions, along with accountability through public reporting and data-driven feedback to doctors. In the early 2000s, the Joint Commission offered greater payments for those providers who administered beta-blocker treatment with high reliability. 
 
Something worked. By 2007, virtually all heart attack patients in the United States were receiving beta-blocker treatment; in all, it had taken 25 years for the one of the most significant medical advances of our time to become a no-brainer. 
 
The experience with beta-blocker treatment has been touted by health policy experts as a triumph of policy and public health. Subsequent research, however, has shed light on the extent of that impact. A cross-sectional review of 234 medical centers by Yale researchers sought to understand the characteristics separating high-performing and low-performing hospitals that beta-blocker treatment. Ultimately, even after accounting for all the geographic and demographic variations across hospitals and their patient populations, the most important aspects of achieving quality were organizational support for the intervention (by physicians, hospital administration, and nurse practitioners) and leadership by physicians themselves. 
 
“I have to believe beta blockers are the way to go,” the chief cardiologist of one hospital said in a separate interview with the researchers. “Then you teach. You first learn, and then you teach. And you teach not only doctors, but you also teach your residents, you teach your nurses, you teach your care coordinators. Everybody has to be on the bandwagon of beta-blockers.”  
 
Here is what hardly mattered: the type of approach. The researchers looked at the seven most common techniques used by hospitals – standing orders, clinical pathways, educational efforts, multidisciplinary teams, care coordinators, reminder forms, and computer support systems – and found that no intervention separated the good and bad hospitals (only standing orders were found to be borderline significant). After everything, what mattered most was not the intervention itself, but the organizational context into which it was implemented.  

Earlier this year, the same researchers returned to the issue of heart attack care in a qualitative study published in the Annals of Internal Medicine. This time, they presented snippets from interviews with administrators and physicians whose hospitals ranked among the best and worst in efforts to improve mortality rates for severe heart attack patients. The conversations were illuminating.

A medical director in Hospital 9 described the leadership’s outlook: “The hospital likes to get disease-specific certification and to advertise it … they formed the committee and tried to check off all the boxes on the list of what they’re supposed to do,” he said, adding: “The administration is concerned about the bottom line.” Despite executing a range of approaches, no set of practices emerged as a solution for quality improvement. “There was no ‘Ah ha!’ We spent years trying to find the silver bullet that would fix everything,” the frustrated Director of Quality Management said. “There is no one issue [in which] we were doing something glaringly wrong.” Incidentally, Hospital 9 was one of the worst in the nation in its efforts to improve quality.  

Among the highest-performing hospitals, the differences were clear. Medical leaders and their staff spoke almost reverently about something much more abstract – organizational values and a shared vision of clinical excellence, described as the “glue” and the “driving force behind everything.” Most importantly, they had found a way to make those values resonate not simply with the leadership, but throughout the entire organization. 

“Everyone in this hospital from the housekeeper to the CEO plays a role. The housekeeping needs to know why it’s important for them to go out and do their job. No one has an insignificant role in it,” said the medical director of one hospital. “So everyone needs to be educated. Everyone.” 

Clinically, the silver bullet for heart attack treatment was a once-in-a-lifetime pharmaceutical innovation. But if there was a silver bullet for achieving high-quality health care delivery, it involved something policy mandates, large-scale public awareness campaigns, and board certification could not do: make people really care. 


## “Look, doctor…”
The notion that local culture matters as much as any specific policy is not limited to health care. In fact, over the past few decades, organizational theorists have observed this phenomenon in companies across a range of high-reliability industries, from airlines to chemical plants to nuclear facilities. What is less clear is why or how this happens. After all, the academic and policy communities invest much effort researching the best interventions and piloting them across a variety of care sites. It is hardly apparent why shared values, in so many contexts, trumps carefully designed procedures; and even less clear how an abstract ideal is translated into tangible improvement. 

The key may be in understanding industries whose work, like hospital medicine, naturally involves complex and unforeseen errors. In these environments, trial-and-error is not an available strategy for improvement: every trial is the consequence of a unique set of complications (think ER caseloads with a variety of socioeconomic backgrounds and comorbidities); and each error can propagate rapidly in equally complicated ways (think the Deepwater Horizon oil spill). Ironically, these are the same reasons why ostensible solutions are difficult to adopt – in practice, they involve a high level of uncertainty for which evidence provides no comfort.  

Social science has helped uncover how health care overcomes this uncertainty. The classic 1966 study Medical Innovation -- one of the first formal social network analyses -- tracked the curiously swift diffusion of doctors’ prescriptions for the antibiotic “wonderdrug” tetracycline in four Illinois cities. Researchers catalogued the extensive interpersonal connections between doctors in the study and found that the spread of tetracycline adoption closely tracked with the doctors’ professional relationships. More than clinical trials and carefully constructed guidelines, informal conversations proved irreplaceable as a tool for teaching and convincing doctors to adopt. 

In his description of the study, sociologist Everett Rogers wrote that “subjective evaluations of the new drug, based on the personal experiences of a doctor’s peers, were key…when an office partner said to a colleague: ‘Look, doctor, I prescribe [tetracycline] for my patients, and it cures them more effectively than other antibiotics,’ that kind of message had an effect.” As conversations with early adopters proliferated through the social networks, the risk involved in adopting the treatment steadily lessened. In this way, the “meaning of the new drug was socially constructed.” 

The model for delivery innovation, then, was not simply objective research or guidelines; it was doctors themselves. 

The tetracycline study is part of an exploding body of literature which finds that health care, by nature, seems to be susceptible to the vicissitudes of its social environment. A 2003 study through the Brookings Institution reviewed claims data from Florida cardiologists and found that their tendency to order costly and risky operations (like bypass surgery or angioplasty) over non-invasive drug treatments was much less dependent on the patient than the practice style of that physician’s social network. Even on the patient side, a 2007 article in The New England Journal of Medicine garnered international attention for describing how obesity spread like a contagion over a community of 12,000 people over a period of 32 years. At some point, we are all practicing socialized medicine; that is, medicine embedded in social networks, personal anecdotes, and local values.

In adopting a culture of excellence, the best hospitals have harnessed this social mode of learning to both align incentives for its staff and reduce the uncertainty of adopting quality improvements. Formally, academicians have termed this organizational strategy “collective mindfulness” – a mental framework of operation that relies on flexible responses within team-based settings. Informally, we might call it something else: friendship and trust. 

Ultimately, research analyses are just crude ways of expressing what we already know: that although medicine is a science, health care is still a deeply human, and thus deeply imperfect, endeavor. And even the most powerful solutions are nothing if they can’t be anchored to the particular circumstances of time and place. If innovations in health care delivery are to work, they must rely on the very things that make them imperfect.

 	
## “One community at a time”
That smaller cultural changes must accompany delivery system innovation is a truth already starting to take root among the largest institutions in health care. “All health care reform is local,” is a common saying among health care experts, and one of the key tenets in the mission statement for the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation. In a speech on health system improvement given in early May, Kathleen Sebelius stated, “this transformation will happen one hospital and one community at a time. We can provide support and establish incentives, but you are the ones who will have to do the hard work of putting better systems into practice.” 

In this way, the Partnership for Patients and the CMMI appear to be elegant solutions. The programs aim to encourage efficient, integrated care through a series of pilot programs and local interventions.  Far from mandating top-down solutions, HHS is encouraging collaborations between hundreds of provider groups, hospitals, consumer groups, employers, and state and local agencies. The specific mechanisms of those solutions have not been articulated, but $1 billion has been allotted to test interventions in hospitals that can demonstrate both the organizational capacity and the will to implement quality efforts. In many ways, the programs accelerate the national conversation on quality, but success still rightfully hinges on the prerogative of local systems to improve themselves.  

“I’ve been working with patient safety for the better part of twenty years, and I haven’t seen anything like this before,” Donald Berwick, head of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid services, said. “It’s thrilling.”  

Yet despite this initial enthusiasm, the goals are plainly unrealistic. In the next two years, the Partnership aims to reduce preventable injuries and complications by 40 percent, and reduce all hospital readmissions by 20 percent. President Obama’s proposed FY2012 budget is attributing to both programs $50 billion in savings over the next decade. If our previous forays into quality culture are any indication, system-wide changes involve a long and arduous process on every level of organization. 

This is where laudable large-scale visions may run into hard politics: In a few years time, when those outcomes and savings fail to materialize, the agency may be forced to rely on policy levers that will inadvertently (and necessarily) undo those cultural changes. PPACA gives the HHS Secretary the legal authority to expand the scope of demonstration projects in Medicare, Medicaid, and CHIP through formal rule-making processes. In such a case, all hospitals and provider groups who accept those beneficiaries will be subject to newly mandated initiatives and data collection requirements, regardless of how that program fits into the local culture of care. Expanding the scope and scale of demonstrations is an easy solution, but policy by itself can do little to change the social norms within a hospital. 

The much more real concern, though, is that the notion of “a culture of quality” itself may become codified and abstracted in ways that suit the data-driven needs of policymakers and not caregivers or patients. 

By necessity, policymakers and providers live in two different worlds. And in the same way doctors use their social environment to understand health care, policymakers rely on what is most immediate and concrete for them -- data. Serious reviews of high-performing systems in medical journals and government reports invariably center on technocratic details: Medicare fee schedules, HMO case manager scripts, NCQA accreditation, HEDIS scorecards – all the things that can be tracked, measured, standardized, and then replicated. In the policy world, data is the social capital, and its language is a series of acronyms, outcome measures, and glossary terms.

Observing system-wide trends are, of course, vitally necessary for public and private sector researchers. But in the search for replicable interventions, data will always tend to discount what it can’t see: idiosyncratic interactions with patients, complicated webs of friendships between doctors, unique cultural norms within hospitals, and all the (literally) immeasurable ways communities and people learn how to deliver care better.  This incongruity will always exist: There can never be a finely-tuned implementation strategy for, “everybody has to be on the bandwagon of beta-blockers”; and fee schedules can no more incentivize doctors to talk and influence one another than they can mandate genuine friendship. In health care delivery, the most important innovations take place in the spaces between policy. 

In a 2006 commentary on the Agency for Healthcare Quality’s website, SUNY-Albany professor Timothy J. Hoff cautioned what happens when, in the surging era of patient safety, the language of policy increasingly fills those spaces. He lamented that “all sorts of safety culture measurements and assessments now exist. We treat the concept as if it has universality in both form and function across health care settings. We treat it holistically and distinctly, something to be developed in its entirety. Accreditation and awarding organizations come up with neat little checklists to quantify it for their reviews. For these reasons, the concept of safety culture is in danger of becoming mechanistic and rhetorical, and, as that happens, it loses some of its power to promote safe health.”  

Hoff’s criticism raises a point that, in the efforts to promote quality care, should be an ongoing question: to what extent does policy have the power to promote cultural change? If we are to understand innovation as a social process, then the data-driven tools of policy offer few solutions. If the integrated care demonstrations reduced readmissions by a significant amount, was that a triumph of national policy or local culture? Even we begin to unravel those social influences, can they be superimposed onto different networks of people? We know there is no silver bullet – is there a bullet at all? 

As the policy world inevitably involves itself in the socialized world of local care, it is not hard to envision this future: a system of improvement that is precise, accurate, and wrong. 

And perhaps that is the unsatisfying conclusion to be reached: policy can only implement policy; it cannot implement behavior. When, on a national level, we discuss innovations for highly local and personal problems, we are really discussing something much more complex and profound: strengthening the ties between a community of professionals and their patients. And for that to work, the only policy solution is to cede governance to forces we cannot easily see, measure, or understand: people.
